Workshop Activities
---
Activity 1:
Select and discuss three risk management methodologies in the context of cyber risk management. The methedologies to be examined are:
- Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA)
- Business Impact Analysis (BIA)
- Monte Carlo Simulation

Answer:
- Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FEMA) is a method used to identify and assess possible failures in a system, and to help understand their effects. FEMA has a few core steps. First, failures in the system are identified by analysing the different components such as hardware failures, software vulnerabilities, or simple human error. Then, the effect of these failures are evaluated against the system's overall security, from how impactful a data breach could be, to system downtime, and malicious unauthorised access. Finally, the possible failures are given a Risk Prioirty Number based on it's severity, occurence, and detectability, helping to prioritise the potential risks. (https://bluegoatcyber.com/blog/a-guide-to-fmea-failure-mode-and-effects-analysis/)
- Business Impact Analysis (BIA) is a method used to assess the possible impacts and disruptions to important business processes. Similar to FEMA, BIA has a few important steps. First, the critical business functions of the organisation are identified, and the ones most vulnerable to cyber incidents are highlighted. Then, the potential consequences of a cyber attack on these critical functions are analysed and assessed. This can be done by listing the financial, operational, and reputational impacts of cyber attack results. Finally, strategies are created to recover from possible cyber attacks, such as redundant backups, disaster plans, and other procedures. These help the organisation return critical business functions to working order as quickly as possible. (https://www.ready.gov/business/planning/impact-analysis)
- Monte Carlo Simulations are a method that uses statistical modeling and random samples to calculate the probability of different outcomes in a cyber attack. First, a model is developed that simulates the organisation's systems and the potential cyber risks. This includes the likelyhood of different attacks or internal failures. Then, the simulation is run using random sampling, so as to generate a range of possible outcomes. Multiple simulations help estimate the probability and the impact of different attack scenarios. Finally, using these simulated scenarios and probabilities, a risk analysis is performed on their impacts. This allows prioritised preventative strategies to be put in place around the most likely scenarios first. (https://medium.com/@BestCybersecurityNews/what-is-the-monte-carlo-simulation-in-cybersecurity-f351ee00c282)

---
Activity 2:
Analyse the significance of the following tools in conduction effective cyber risk management:
- Risk Management Framework (RMF) Tools: RSA Archer
- Security Information and Event Management (SIEM) Systems: Splunk, IBM QRadar
- Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) Tools: MetricStream, ServiceNow

Answer:
- Risk Management Framework (RMF) Tools, such as RSA Archer, are designed to help organisations manage risk by automating, assessing, and integrating the entire process of risk management. Some of the important functions RMF tools perform include centralising risk management by bringing all documentation, and tracking across a number of systems into one place. It also helps by ensuring the organisation is compliant with the various cybersecurity standards by documenting the organisation's controls. RMF tools can generate thorough risk assessments and automate risk management tasks, which helps in better decision making and reduces human error.
- Security Information and Even Management (SIEM) Systems, such as Splunk and IBM QRadar, are tools that actively monitor and respond to cyber threats in real-time. SIEM systems help to pull log data from various systems within the organisation, which can then be monitored. These logs can be analysed for particular patterns or behaviours that indicate cyber threats. These systems allow cyber security teams to quickly and promptly react to incidents, reducing the possible time that malicious actors are able to access or disrupt systems. (https://www.ibm.com/topics/siem)
- Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) Tools, such as MetricStream and ServiceNow, allow organisations to further manage and report on their systems. GRC tools allow for the centralisation of risk management into one area, giving easy access to reporting and dashboards. This is another tool that is important for ensuring compliance with regulations and standards, by reducing the complexity of viewing and checking on all areas of a system and organisation down into one area. GRC tools may also be able to automate compliance and auditing requirements. These tools again reduce the possibility of human error in maintaining and updating systems. (https://www.ibm.com/topics/grc)

---
Activity 3:
Examine and discuss the following cyber risk management frameworks, focusing on their application and relevance to cyber risk management:
- NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF)
- ISO-IEC 27005
- COBIT
- ITIL (Information Technology Infrastructure Library)

Answer:
- The NIST Cyber Security Framwork (CSF) is a standardised library developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology which helps organisations to manage cybersecurity risks. NIST CFS has five core functions: identify (understand and assess risks), protect (provide appropriate safeguards against threats), detect (provide the methods of discovering the threats), respond (the best methods and steps to take when a threat is discovered), and recover (how to maintain and implement restoration and backups after an incident). These functions help organisations and industries of all sizes discover, protect against, and recover from cyber threats. NIST CSF also gives a structured and common language for discussing cyber risk. (https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework)
- ISO-IEC 27005 is a standard that discusses information security risk management. It provides a number of guidelines for organisations on identifying threats and vulnerabilities, how to assess them, how and what controls to implement, and how to monitor and review risks going forwards. The standard lists the importance of qualitative and quantitative risk assessment, utilising the most appropriate security controls for the identified risks, and the importance of proper communication with stakeholders around thr organisation to ensure these controls are upheld. (https://www.iso.org/standard/80585.html)
- Control Objective for Information and Related Technologies (COBIT) is a framework created by ISACA for the management of an organisation's IT needs. It covers a number of areas, but has important details on management of cyber risks. Some of the goals of COBIT around cybersecurity are to Align, Plan, and Organise (APO), and to Monitor, Evaluate, and Assess (MEA). APO lists how to establish a risk management framework, while MEA provides specific goals around continuing monitoring and keeping within standards and regulations. (https://www.isaca.org/resources/cobit)
- Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) is a set of guidelines around the best methods for IT service management. It aims to keep IT services in line with the actual needs of the organisation. Additionally, it includes cyber risk managemnt practices. Specifically, the Service Lifecycle practice touches on service design, which involves designing secure and systems which meet cyber risk management. Next, service operation discusses the delivery of an IT service which minimises risks, also including incident management and security management. Finally, the concept of continual service improvement importantly talks about regularly reassessing and improving services such as cyber security processes, monitoring, and response options. (https://www.axelos.com/certifications/itil-service-management/)

---
